
--- Page 4 ---
Results
We report results from 4 simulations (denoted experiments). In Experiment 1, we explore the
ability of recurrent neural networks to recreate the data described in [10]. In Experiment 2, we
study why and when the geometry emerges. In experiment 3, we adapt the retrocue paradigm
to a new case with variable delay periods and explore how this affects the neural geometry in
RNNs. Finally, in Experiment 4, we use tools from cognitive psychology to characterize the
behaviour of neural networks in a variant of the paradigm in which cues have variable validity,
as well as examine relationship between neural geometry and behaviour in the RNNs.
Experiment 1
We trained recurrent neural network models (RNNs, N = 30 models with different initialisa-
tion and trial order) to perform a retro-cueing task comparable to that previously described in
[10] (see Fig 1A and 1B). Each model was a vanilla RNN with a single recurrent layer, incorpo-
rating rectified linear unit (ReLU) nonlinearities, and a single decoding layer (see Fig 1C for a
schematic of the network architecture). Each trial was composed of four successive inputs.
Firstly, networks received two concatenated circular normal inputs (corresponding to distrib-
uted representations of the colour stimuli at two different locations, which we denote colour-
L1, colour-L2), followed by seven cycles of delay (pre-cue delay). This was followed by a one-
hot input (the retro-cue) denoting which of the two stimulus locations was relevant on the cur-
rent trial and then finally, a second memory delay (post-cue delay). An example trial is shown
in Fig 1B.
The networks were trained using stochastic gradient descent to minimise the mean squared
error (MSE) between their output and the stimulus colour shown at the cued location. Thus,
we do not engineer the representations into the networks but allow them to form autono-
mously during optimisation. To bound performance we added zero-mean Gaussian noise to
the hidden activations of the models and trained until a plateau in the loss curve had been
detected (see Methods). After approximately 220 ± 105 epochs the networks converged to a
mean absolute angular error of 16.40 ± 0.94˚ (M±SEM). This was somewhat smaller than the
value reported for monkeys (51.8˚). This discrepancy could be seen to reflect other sources of
noise (e.g., motor error during saccadic responding) that are present in the animals but not in
our models but is otherwise not consequential for our findings (increasing the noise added to
network units precluded convergence).
In Experiment 1, we first explored the representational geometry that related both cued and
uncued items in the recurrent layer of the RNN, and compared it to that reported in macaque
LPFC [10]. Noting a correspondence between the two, we then studied how this geometry
emerged in the RNN over the course of learning, what connectivity patterns gave rise to it, and
how it related to network behaviour, allowing us to form predictions for future studies.
Representation of cued items. To study the geometry of the cued memory representa-
tions formed in the pre-cue and post-cue delay periods, we focused on the “selection” task
described in [10]. The geometry was computed by applying dimensionality reduction to the
features (neural activity over units or neurons) × conditions (each item binned by colour and
cue) matrix and plotting the reduced reconstruction in 3D. We begin by alerting the reader to
two frames of reference for this analysis. Firstly, we can ask about the relationship between col-
our-L1 and colour-L2 items when they are cued (Cued Geometry below) or uncued (Uncued
Geometry below). Alternatively, we can ask about the relationship between the two items when
one of them is cued and the other is not (Cued/Uncued Geometry).
We focused first on the Cued Geometry. In monkey LPFC, in both the pre- and post-cue
periods, the neural representations arranged themselves in two rings, representing similarity
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 4 / 33

--- Page 5 ---
in the circular colour space for each of the two respective locations (L1 and L2; [10]). During
the pre-cue delay, the angle between the two planes that lay parallel to the interior plane of
each ring was close to 90˚. However, during the post-cue delay the two rings became aligned
and phase matched, i.e., corresponding points in colour space were aligned on the two rings. A
visualisation of this orthogonal-to-paralle l transformation from the paper is shown in Fig 2A.
To study the memory representations created by the trained RNNs, we followed the same
approach. We extracted hidden unit activity patterns corresponding to each trial type (defined
Fig 2. The geometry of cued mnemonic representa tions learnt by the RNNs. A. Visualis ation of the pre- (left) and post-cue (right) geometry of cued items
reported in [10]. Population response s from LPFC binned into 4 colour categories (denot ed by marker colour) for each stimulus location (upper, lower–
denoted by marker shape). Data plotted in reduced dimensiona lity space, defined by the first 3 principal components (PCs) of the 8 location-c olour pairs.
Planes of best fit for each location shown as grey quadrilaterals . B. Analogous visualisatio n of the hidden activity patterns from two example RNN models for
the pre-cue (left) and post-cue (right) delay. Two locations (L1, L2) correspond to triangles and squares, respective ly. The percentage of total variance explained
by each PC axis shown in square brackets. Chosen models (in this and subsequent figures) correspond to the ones with geometries qualitatively most and least
similar to the group-level average (in this case, the average post-cue geometry). Note that the principal component s were calculate d separately for each delay
(and model), thus the PC axes shown e.g. in the upper left (examp le model 1, pre-cue) panel are not the same as the ones shown in the upper right (examp le
model 1, post-cue) panel. C.-D. Between-p lane angles θ for the pre- (red dots) and post-cue delay (navy triangles ) timepoint s, respective ly. Lighter and darker
colours correspond to the values for individua l models and grand averages, respectively. E. Phase alignment angles ψ between the cued planes in the post-cue
delay. F. Proportion of total variance explained (PVE) by the first 3 PCs for the PCA models fit to activation patterns from individua l networks . Values for
individual models shown in lighter, and grand averages in darker colours. G. Subspace alignment index (AI) between location-s pecific planes during the pre-
(red) and post-cue (navy) delay intervals. Individual models shown as points, bars correspond to the grand averages. AI reported for 2- and 3-dimen sional
subspace s H. AI for the unrotated (light grey) and rotated (dark grey) subspace s–for descripti on, refer to the main text. Statistically significan t contrasts
denoted by asterisks (*: p < .05, **: p < .01, ***: p < .001).
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011555. g002
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 5 / 33

--- Page 6 ---
by the unique colour-L1, colour-L2 and retro-cue combination) at the final timepoint of each
delay period. For visualisation shown in Fig 2B, we binned the activation patterns correspond-
ing to different stimulus colours into 4 equally spaced colour categories and collapsed the data
across the uncued stimuli, resulting in a 200 x 8 (unit activity by conditions) matrix. Subse-
quently, we performed principal components analysis (PCA) to project the data into a
3-dimensional space.
As reported in [10], we observed that the input representations were structured by their
similarity, with the “colour” representations for each stimulus location largely confined to
2-dimensional subspaces. Critically however, visual inspection suggested that the orientation
of the location-specific planes in the 3-dimensional space differed between the two trial peri-
ods in a very similar way to that seen in monkey LPFC. During the pre-cue delay, the location-
specific planes were orthogonal to one another, whereas during the post-cue delay, the two
planes had a roughly parallel configuration. Moreover, the corresponding colour category rep-
resentations were also phase-aligned, potentially permitting a common readout mechanism
(see Fig 2B). To directly test this hypothesis, we trained linear classifiers to discriminate
between cued colours on trials where location 1 was cued and tested their cross-generalisation
performance on trials where location 2 was cued, and vice versa. The results of this analysis
confirmed that a single linear readout could be used for both Cued colour planes and are
reported in a supplementary note (S1 Note).
To quantify the described geometry, we reduced the data to three dimensions for each net-
work, estimated best-fitting planes for the datapoints corresponding to each cued location and
calculated the angle θ between them in this low-rank space. Across all trained models, θ was
clustered at the +90˚ and -90˚ marks in the pre-cue delay (Fig 2C). To test for the statistical
significance of this effect, we rectified the data and performed a v-test with a hypothesised
angular mean of +90˚ (see Methods for more details). This returned a significant result (v(29)
= 22.18, p < .001), confirming that the pre-cue planes were indeed orthogonal. In contrast, in
the post-cue delay, θ was significantly clustered around 0˚ (circular mean = 5.66˚; v-test results:
v(29) = 24.09, p < .001, see also Fig 2D). The mean absolute difference between pre- and post-
cue θ was also significantly different from 0˚ (one-sample test for mean angle, M = 93.2˚, 95%
CI = 69.66˚, 116.74˚).
In ref [10], the authors report that the planes were phase aligned during the post-cue period.
To quantify the phase alignment between the L1 and L2 datapoints in the RNN, we projected
them onto their respective planes before rotating the planes to be coplanar. The phase align-
ment angle ψ was then obtained from a rotation matrix that most closely mapped L1 data-
points onto L2 datapoints. Importantly, ψ was only defined for geometries that could not be
classified as either mirror reflections or bowtie shapes. Given that the pre-cue planes were sig-
nificantly orthogonal, we only report ψ for the post-cue delay, where it was defined for all
models and significantly clustered around 0˚ (circular mean = 1.67˚, v-test results: z(29) =
29.57, p < .001, N = 30). Thus, our results indicate that in the RNN, like in the monkeys, the
post-cue planes were both parallel and phase-aligned.
We confirmed the above results with an analogous analysis using the subspace alignment
index (AI) introduced in [20] (see also Methods). This method projects the data from condi-
tion i into the subspace of condition j and calculates the amount of variance of i explained by
the subspace of j. The AI metric takes values between 0 and 1, which correspond respectively
to fully orthogonal and fully aligned subspaces. We calculated the AI for 2 and 3 dimensional
subspaces and found that in both cases, the mean pre-cue AI was low (AI = 0.26 and 0.3, for 2
and 3 dimensions, respectively), indicating nearly orthogonal subspaces for the two locations.
In contrast, the mean post-cue AI was significantly higher (more parallel) in both target
dimensionalities (2D: AI = 0.63, paired t-test: t(29) = 6.13, p < .001, one-tailed, Cohen’s
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 6 / 33

--- Page 7 ---
d = 1.12; 3D: AI = 0.64; t(29) = 5.98, p < .001, one-tailed, Cohen’s d = 1.09), indicating a signif-
icant increase in subspace alignment across the two delays (see also Fig 2G).
Lastly, we investigated how a given colour ring was oriented with respect to itself before
and after the presentation of the retro-cue. This allowed us to study the nature of the transfor-
mation that the network had learned to perform. To parallelise the subspaces, the networks
could either learn to rotate both pre-cue subspaces, or to rotate only one, keeping the other
static. To establish which solution was utilised by the models, we performed the AI analysis in
2-fold cross-validation. This was necessary because the frame of reference of location (e.g., left
vs. right side) is arbitrary, and so if different networks learned to rotate left or right stimuli,
averaging the data would obscure the results. Thus, we used half of the data to identify the
unrotated and rotated locations (based on their AI values), and the other half to confirm
whether there was a significant difference between them. We observed that the mean AI for
the unrotated location (AI = 0.60 and 0.61 for 2 and 3D, respectively) was significantly higher
than for the rotated location (2D: AI = 0.28, Wilcoxon signed-rank test W(29) = 462, p < .001,
matched rank biserial correlation = 0.987; 3D: AI = 0.32; W(29) = 465, p < .001, matched rank
biserial correlation = 1.0; see Fig 2H) and comparable to the AI for the post-cue subspaces
(Fig 2G). We obtained similar results when we computed rotation of the between-plane angles
using a similar cross-validated approach (S1D Fig). Together, these results imply that by con-
vergence, the networks had learnt to rotate only one of the pre-cue subspaces, keeping the
other in its pre-cue orientation. These findings diverge from the observations made in monkey
LPFC, where the different task periods were associated with independent subspaces.
Representation of uncued items–Uncued Geometry. The RNN thus seems to capture the
cued stimulus representations seen in macaque prefrontal cortex. Next, we turned to investi-
gate the Uncued Geometry, that is the relationship between items colour-L1 and colour-L2
when they were not signalled by the retrocue. First, we asked whether the RNNs retained any
information at all about the uncued item in the post-cue period. In monkey LPFC, there was
significant colour information about both memory items (quantified as the circular entropy of
each neuron’s response to colour) in all trial periods [10]. This was the case even though the
monkeys were never probed on the uncued memory item and could have, in theory, discarded
it after the cue presentation. We found the same to be true in the RNNs. For all networks, lin-
ear decoders trained to perform pair-wise colour discriminations of the uncued items in the
post-cue delay showed significantly above-chance mean performance when tested on held out
data (M = 98.16% decoding accuracy, Wilcoxon signed-rank test, W(29) = 465, p < .001;
matched rank biserial correlation = 1.0).
We then set to find out if the uncued memory items also underwent a transformation from
a feature-based representation to a more response-oriented format. In monkey LPFC, the
uncued subspaces became slightly, but non-significantly, more parallel in the post-cue delay.
Moreover, the two subspaces, unlike their cued counterparts, were not phase-aligned [10]
(Fig 3A). To visualise and quantify the geometry of these representations across our models,
we followed the same steps as described above (in the section subtitled representation of cued
items), except the data were averaged across uncued rather than cued locations (the configura-
tion in the post-cue delay shown in Fig 3B). For each delay period, we calculated and com-
pared the two location subspaces using the AI (Fig 3D). The mean AI in the post-cue delay
was marginally higher than in the pre-cue delay (2D: pre-cue AI = 0.26, post-cue AI = 0.32,
paired t-test: t(29) = 1.36, p = .092, one-tailed, Cohen’s d = 0.25; 3D: pre-cue AI = 0.30, post-
cue AI = 0.37, paired t-test: t(29) = 1.77, p = .043, one-tailed, Cohen’s d = 0.32). It was also,
however, significantly lower than the post-cue index for the cued subspaces (paired t-test: 2D:
t(29) = -6.74, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.23; 3D: t(29) = -5.84, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 1.07). A com-
plementary analysis of the angles formed by the two planes in the post-cue delay revealed that
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 7 / 33

--- Page 8 ---
Fig 3. The geometr y of the uncued item representa tions. A. Visualisation of the pre- (left) and post-cue (right) geometry of the
uncued memory items report ed in [10]. Populati on activity patterns from macaque LPFC were averaged across the cued items and
binned into 4 uncued colour categorie s (denoted by marker colours). Data from each delay period was plotted in reduced
dimensional ity space, degined by the first 3 PCs of the 8 location-col our pairs. Planes of best fit for each location shown as grey
quadrilateral s. All conventions as described in Fig 2A. B. Hidden activity patterns for the uncued items, from two example models
visualised in a 3-dimen sional space. All conventions as in Fig 2B. C. Between-p lane angles (θ, left) and phase alignment angles (ψ,
right) between the two uncued colour planes in the post-cue delay. Individual models and populati on mean shown as transpar ent
and opaque markers, respectively. D. Alignment index for the uncued subspace s in the pre- and post-cue delays. Note that prior to
the presentation of the retro-cue, the coding format is location based. Theref ore, the pre-cue data is the same as shown in Fig 2E. E.
Visualisat ion of the cued and uncued memory items on trials where the upper location was cued reported in [10]. Population
activity patterns from macaque LPFC were averaged across the uncued items to calculate the cued item representat ions, and across
cued items for the uncued representat ions, prior to binning into 4 colour categories each. Data from each delay plotted in the
reduced dimensional ity space, correspond ing to the first 3PCs. F. Visualis ation of the hidden activity patterns for cued and uncued
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 8 / 33

--- Page 9 ---
their orientation did not show any consistent trend across trained models (see Fig 3C, left).
This was confirmed by the results of a Rayleigh test which failed to reject the null hypothesis of
a uniform distribution of plane angles around the unit circle (z(29) = 0.06, p = .941). Similarly,
there was no significant phase alignment between the uncued planes (v-test results: v(15) =
1.81, p = .261, N = 16), and nearly 50% of the models developed geometries where the two
planes were either mirror reflections of one another, or one of the geometries was twisted into
a bowtie (non-planar) shape. Taken all together, these findings show that the two uncued sub-
spaces are generally not transformed into a common frame of reference post-cue and their pre-
cise arrangement is variable between the trained models. Whilst one might be tempted to
propose that the Uncued geometry is irrelevant for the choice, we shall see below that (perhaps
surprisingly) it is reliably predictive of behaviour (see Experiment 3 below).
Representation of uncued items–Cued/Uncued Geometry. To successfully perform the
task, the networks need to be able to prevent cross-interference between the two memory
items (cued and uncued) across the entire trial duration, including the post-cue delay. In our
next analysis, thus, we focussed on the relationship between cued and uncued items. We call
this Cued/Uncued Geometry and note that this is different from analysing the relationship
between each item (say, colour-L1) on those trials where it was cued relative to those where it is
uncued. Instead, here we examine the relationship between colour-L1 and colour-L2 in the
frame of reference of the cue.
It seems a priori plausible that, in order to minimise interference, the cued and uncued
items are orthogonalized, as was observed in monkeys (Fig 3E). To test this prediction in our
models, we calculated the angles between the cued and uncued subspaces and averaged them
across the two trial types (defined by the location of the retrocue). In line with our expectation,
we found that the distribution of angles across the trained networks was significantly clustered
around 90 degrees (though with some variability across individual models, v-test: v(29) =
10.31, p < .01; Fig 3G, left). In agreement, average AI values between the cued and uncued
subspaces were low (2D: M = 0.32, SEM = 0.03; 3D: M = 0.37, SEM = 0.03; Fig 3G, right) and
comparable to the values reported for the Cued planes in the pre-cue delay (cf. Fig 2G, red
bars).
Furthermore, as was reported for monkey LPFC, the visualisation of the geometry in Fig 3F
suggested that the uncued colour representations were much more compressed (i.e., less dis-
criminable) in the representational space than their cued counterparts. To quantify this effect,
we calculated the area of the polygons formed by the datapoints in the 3D space and compared
this colour discriminability index (CDI) across conditions with contrasts based on the results
reported for monkey LPFC [10]. We found that the mean colour discriminability in the post-
cue delay was significantly higher for cued (CDI = 1294.1, arbitrary units) than uncued items
(CDI = 45.46 Wilcoxon signed-rank test: W(29) = 465, p < .001, one-tailed, matched rank
biserial correlation = 1.0; see also Fig 3H). Next, we tested the cued and uncued CDI against
the pre-cue baseline. In accordance with previous reports from monkey LPFC [10] and human
neuroimaging work [21,22], the cued CDI was significantly greater than the pre-cue baseline
(CDI = 17.3; Wilcoxon signed-rank test: W(29) = 465, p < .001, one-tailed, matched rank
items in the post-cue delay, on trials where L1 was cued. Data from two example models. Note the plane for L2 is severely
compressed and thus hard to see. G. Left: Angles θ (rectifie d) between cued and uncued planes in the post-cue delay, averaged
across the two retro-cue locations. Values for individual models shown in grey, average across networks in black. Right:
Compleme ntary AI values between the cued and uncued subspace s, averaged across the two retro-cue locations. AI calculate d for
2- and 3-dimen sional subspace s. Black circles correspond to values for individual models, grey bars denote the means across all
networks. H. Colour discriminab ility index (CDI) for the pre-cue subspace s (averag ed across both locations, black circles) and cued
and uncued subspace s in the post-cue delay (blue triangles and green crosses, respectively).
https://doi. org/10.1371/j ournal.pcb i.1011555.g 003
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 9 / 33

--- Page 10 ---
biserial correlation = 1.0). For the uncued item, our hypothesis stated that there would be no
significant increase from the baseline, as was reported in [10]. To test it, we performed a Bayes-
ian non-parametric t-test. This returned a BF
01
of 0.73, indicating anecdotal evidence for the
alternative hypothesis of a difference in medians. For comparison, a two-tailed Wilcoxon
signed-rank test was not significant (W(29) = 149, p = .085, matched rank biserial correlation
= -0.36). These results suggest that to prevent interference between the cued and uncued
items, the RNNs both increase the representational discriminability of the former, as well as
orthogonalize the two items at the end of the post-cue delay.
Learning dynamics and connectivity. Thus far, we have characterised the representa-
tional geometry formed by the RNNs and compared it to that observed in monkey LPFC.
Next, we exploited the learning dynamics of the RNN to ask how the observed geometry
emerged over the course of training.
Neural networks showed stereotypical learning dynamics characterised by a pronounced
plateau period at approximately half of the initial loss value, buttressed by steeper declines
both early and late (see Fig 4A for an example). We therefore decided to track the representa-
tional changes in the networks at three timepoints–at initialisation (untrained), the mid-learn-
ing plateau (plateau) and after convergence (trained). The timepoint used as the mid-training
plateau was designated as the first local minimum in the derivative of the training loss with
respect to time (for more details, refer to Methods and S1 Fig). We quantified the Cued Geome-
try across the different training stages by calculating the angle θ and the AI at the end points of
the memory delays. The results of this analysis are shown in Fig 4C. Untrained networks prop-
agated the orthogonal inputs throughout the pre-cue delay without changing their relative
arrangement, as evidenced by an AI value of approximately 0 (Fig 4C, top right) and θ cluster-
ing around ±90˚. This is expected, given that inputs to the network are orthogonal. After the
presentation of the retrocue, both the AI and θ remained close to their pre-cue values. By the
mid-training plateau, the networks had learnt to parallelise the two planes in the post-cue
delay. Interestingly, however, this coding format also extended into the pre-cue delay, as evi-
denced by an AI value of close to 1 and θ clustering around 0˚. As described in the previous
section (Representation of cued items), the trained networks settled on an orthogonal plane
configuration in the pre-cue delay, which was transformed into a parallel arrangement after
the presentation of the retrocue. Thus, the network first learned to parallelise the inputs
entirely, before gradually learning to keep them separate before the retrocue appeared.
Next, we asked how the retro-cue triggered the representational changes observed in the
recurrent layer. To address this, we analysed the connectivity patterns that were acquired over
the course of training between the retrocue input units and the recurrent nodes. For each
model, we calculated the correlation between the weights from each cue unit and the recurrent
units (weights from an example model shown in Fig 4B). Consistent with other recent obser-
vations, we found that the models learnt opposing weight patterns for the two retro-cue inputs
[12,23]. More specifically, the recurrent units that had positive connections weights with the
first retro-cue unit had negative connection weights linking them with the other cue unit, and
vice versa. Across all neural networks, this manifested as a significantly negative correlation
coefficient (one sample t-test: t(29) = -68.17, p < .001, Cohen’s d = -12.45). This negative cor-
relation, in combination with the ReLU nonlinearities, ensures that hidden units that have
inputs from one context units have none from the other and vice versa; this effectively creates
two subpopulations of units which code for the context provided by the two retrocues.
Lastly, we investigated the relationship between the representational geometry observed in
trained networks and their behavioural timecourse. To this end, we asked whether the orienta-
tion of the Cued, Uncued and Cued/Uncued subspaces (as quantified with the AI metric) was
predictive of the training latency (time to convergence; see Methods) across all trained
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 10 / 33

--- Page 11 ---
Fig 4. Learnin g dynamics. A. Training loss of an example RNN model plotted against training epochs. The three dots correspond to the
timepoints chosen for the subsequent analysis: untrained (orange), plateau (magenta) and trained (purple) stages, respectively. B. Scatterplot of the
weights between the two retro-cue input units and recurrent units for an example model. C. Comparison of the plane angles θ and AI between the
cued planes across different training stages for the pre- (top row) and post-cue (bottom row) delays. Left: Plane angles at the untrained (orange),
plateau (magenta) and trained (purple) stages. Values for individual models show in transparent colours, circular mean in opaque. Right: AI at the
same training stages. Mean across models depicted as bars with individua l datapoin ts overlaid. D. Partial plots showing the log of training epochs
(y-axis) versus the three representat ional geometry metrics used as regression predicto rs (left to right: AI Cued, AI Cued/Uncued and AI Uncued).
Values for individual networks shown as grey dots, regression lines of best fit in red alongside the 95% slope confidence intervals in navy dashed
lines.
https://doi.o rg/10.1371/j ournal.pcb i.1011555.g 004
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 11 / 33

--- Page 12 ---
networks. To increase the power of this analysis (which unlike other analyses described here
relies on correlations over the network population) we trained N = 100 models until the train-
ing loss fell below a common threshold value (see Methods). We then regressed the three AI
values against the total number of training epochs. The regression model explained a signifi-
cant proportion of the variance in training latency (R
2
= .28, F(3,96) = 12.29, p < .001). Out of
the three predictor variables, to our surprise only the Uncued Geometry showed a significant
and positive relationship with the number of training epochs (ß = 0.91, t(96) = 4.48, p < .001).
This means that the more parallel the Uncued geometry in the post-cue period, the longer the
network took to train. By contrast, the AI between the (i) Cued subspaces and (ii) Cued/
Uncued subspaces did not contribute significantly to the model (Cued: ß = -0.125, t(96) =
-0.374, p = .374; Cued/Uncued: ß = 0.17, t(96) = 0.878, p = .382). We were not expecting this
result; which is further discussed below.
Experiment 2: Parallel geometry for more robust maintenance
Thus far, we have observed that RNNs trained on the retro-cueing task learned to transform
the cued item information into a common frame of reference after the retrocue. Whilst this
representational format affords the re-use of a common readout mechanism across all trials
(i.e., irrespective of the retro-cue identity), it is not the only solution to the task. In fact, we
observed that in other variants of the task, where the network first receives a probabilistic ret-
rocue input and a deterministic probe (this paradigm is explored in Experiment 4), networks
trained with no post-probe delay did not develop this geometry, and instead maintained the
cued item information in orthogonal planes throughout the entire trial. Given this observation,
we reasoned that the parallel plane format might be beneficial when there is a pressure to
maintain the cued information in memory after the retro-cue [9]. To test this hypothesis, we
trained models (as before, N = 30 per task variant) on variants of the original task from Experi-
ment 1 (with a deterministic retro-cue and no probe), except that now we parametrically var-
ied the length of the post-cue delay interval, whilst holding the overall trial length constant (see
Fig 5A). We then calculated the AI between the cued subspaces prior to and post retro-cue
presentation and compared them between the different task variants (Fig 5B, red dots and
line). We found that, in agreement with our previous results, all models maintained the cued
Fig 5. Comparison of cued item geometr y across networks trained under various post-cu e maintenanc e pressur e conditions . A. Example trials for a subset
of the parame tric family of retro-cueing tasks used. Overall trial length was constant, and the ratio between pre- and post-cue delay lengths was varied.
Conventi ons as in Fig 1B. B. Comparison of cued subspace AI during the pre- (red circles) and post-cue (blue triangles) intervals between networks trained
with different post-cue delay lengths. Asterisks denote the significance levels of the contrasts described in the main text: ***: p < .001, **: p < .01, ns: p > = .05.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011555. g005
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 12 / 33

--- Page 13 ---
item information in orthogonal subspaces before the retro-cue presentation, regardless of the
task timings.
However, only models trained with longer post-cue delay lengths underwent the previously
noted transition into a parallel subspace format prior to producing a response, whilst networks
trained with shorter delays learnt to read-out cued colour information from the low-dimen-
sional orthogonal subspaces (Fig 5B, blue dots and line). To test the statistical significance of
this finding, we compared the pre- to post-cue difference in AI with a Kruskal-Wallis test,
which showed a significant difference in this metric across the different post-cue delay length
conditions (H(7) = 199.7, p < .001). We then followed up with custom contrasts comparing
the pre- and post-cue AI at each level of the post-cue delay length factor. This revealed no sig-
nificant differences with delay lengths below 3 cycles (t(232) = 0.27, p = .789; t(232) = -1.16, p
= .249; t(232) = -.61, p = .546, in increasing order) and a significantly higher post-cue AI other-
wise (t(232) = 5.04, p < .001; t(232) = 14.53, p < .001; t(232) = 24.3, p < .001, t(232) = 29.52, p
< .001, t(232) = 33.36, p < .001, in increasing order). Note that the degrees of freedom here
are computed from the ANOVA (8 conditions x 30 models = 240 datapoints, see methods).
Interestingly, we also observed that the training time required for convergence differed
between networks trained on variants of the task. More specifically, time to convergence
declined linearly for models trained with increasing lengths of the post-cue delay (see S2 Note
and S2 Fig). These results suggest that networks using the orthogonal plane solution (i.e.,
those trained with short post-cue delay lengths) need to complete the most training iterations
to converge, as compared to the networks using the parallel plane solution (trained with long
post-cue delays).
Experiment 3: Exploring the effects of variable delay periods
In the simulations described thus far, we trained networks with a fixed number of delay cycles.
In biological systems, maintenance processes can be successful even where the delay period
length is unknown, and these conditions typically give rise to the formation of more stable
dynamics (e.g. attractor states) in RNNs [24] and mice [25]. We thus asked whether (i) the net-
works could perform the task under novel delay period lengths and (ii) whether the represen-
tations they formed were dynamic or stable in nature, as well as how these aspects depended
on whether the delay period during training was of variable or fixed duration. Lastly, (iii) we
examined whether the geometry of cued item representations differed depending on the type
of memory maintenance mechanism used by the network.
We sampled delay period durations randomly during training and test, so that networks
could not learn to anticipate the precise delay length on any given trial. In this setting, we
tested performance under three different conditions: a delay length previously experienced
during training, as well as novel in- and out-of-training-rang e lengths. We found that net-
works trained with a fixed delay length could not perform the task with novel delay lengths–
their performance, as measured by the mean absolute angular error rose from 16.37±0.94˚ (M
±SEM) to 87.06±2.82˚ and 81.30±5.74˚ when evaluated on the 3 datasets, respectively (see also
S3A Fig). In contrast, task performance in models trained with variable delay durations
seemed to be less affected by the precise task timings (M±SEM = 7.72±0.22˚, 36.46±1.94˚ and
18.60±2.01˚, respectively; note that perhaps surprisingly generalisation was better to novel
examples outside than inside the training set). Note the overall performance difference
between the fixed and variable delay networks is due to a combination of different noise levels
and training stop procedures used (for more details, refer to the Methods section).
Next, we studied the maintenance mechanisms learned by the networks trained with fixed
and variable delay periods, using a cross-temporal generalisation approach. We trained LDA
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 13 / 33

--- Page 14 ---
classifiers to discriminate between colour pairs using hidden activity patterns from a single
timepoint and tested their performance on all the other trial timepoints (Fig 6A shows the
cross-temporal generalisation scores averaged across models). We observed that neural net-
works trained with variable- and fixed-length delay periods both tended to maintain informa-
tion across the memory delays using a temporally stable code. Accordingly, the mean off-
diagonal delay cross-temporal generalisation scores were significantly higher than chance (0.5)
in both groups (variable-length delay group: M = 0.62, one-sample t-test results: t(29) = 28.88,
p < .001, Cohen’s d = 5.27; fixed-length delay group: M = 0.59, one-sample t-test results on
log-transformed data: t(29) = 4.37, p < .001, Cohen’s d = 0.80). However, as previously
reported [24], the temporal stability of the delay-period code, as indexed by the ratio between
the off- and on-diagonal delay decoding scores, was higher in the variable- than fixed-length
delay group (M = 0.61 and 0.59, respectively) although this was only barely significant (inde-
pendent sample t-test on log-transformed data: t(58) = 1.74, p = .044, one-tailed, Cohen’s
d = 0.32).
Fig 6. Maintenance mechanisms . A. Cross-temp oral generali sation scores for decoders trained to discriminate between colour pairs. Data has been averaged
across all trained networks . Black lines indicate the junction s between task events–st imulus presentation, pre-cue delay, retro-cue, and post-cue delay. Left:
Average scores for models trained with a fixed-length delay interval. Right: analogous plot for models trained with variable delay lengths. Note that the
networks show a stable (cross-general isable) memory code between the 10 and 16 cycle mark, which covers the range of temporal variabil ity experienced
during training (with the post-cue delay starting at the 10 cycle mark and lasting until between the 11 and 18 cycle marks). B. Boxplots showing the distribution
of mean cross-temp oral decoding accuracy scores, averaged across the two memory delays, for all models. Variable delay interval length condition shown on
the left in green, fixed delay length condition on the right in sand. Asterisks denote the results of the one-sided one-samp le t-tests against the chance (50%)
decoding level, *** correspond s to p < .001. C.-D. Plane angles θ between the cued subspace s in the pre- and post-cue delay periods, respective ly. E. Phase
alignment angles ψ between the cued subspaces in the post-cue delay.
https://do i.org/10.1371/j ournal.pc bi.1011555. g006
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 14 / 33

--- Page 21 ---
transformation when the relationship between the retrocue and the trial-relevant item was
deterministic (but not when it was probabilistic, see Expt. 4). Building on this representational
correspondence, we then characterised how and why the described geometry emerged, in
addition to revealing its mechanistic basis, thus providing testable predictions for future
neurobiological studies.
At first glance, the orthogonal geometry in the pre-cue delay might seem a trivial finding,
given that the information about the two stimuli is supplied to the RNN via independent (and
uncorrelated) input channels. Accordingly, this geometry is present even in naïve networks
(Fig 4C). However, during the pre-cue delay, over the course of training the networks first
learn to arrange both mnemonic representations into parallel neural subspaces before con-
verging back onto the orthogonal geometry. This coding format seems well suited to satisfy the
computational demand of the task in the pre-cue delay–namely, the minimalization of inter-
ference between multiple memory items. This interpretation also fits well with other findings
from the literature. For example, a recent sequential working memory study reported that
information about individual stimuli from a sequence was also maintained in orthogonal neu-
ral subspaces in macaque LPFC [15]. Similar observations have also been made in other brain
regions, species and task [12,13,27] as well as in neural networks [23,27,28], suggesting that
factorising representations into orthogonal subspaces to prevent cross-interference is a general
coding principle shared by both biological and artificial networks.
Interestingly, in parallel to the monkey results from [10], the RNNs seem to use two mecha-
nisms for preventing interference between the cued and uncued items in the post-cue delay.
Firstly, we found evidence for the modulation of the discriminability of the cued and uncued
stimuli. In the representational geometry framework, this corresponds to the overall size of the
colour rings. In agreement with previous reports from both macaque [10] and human research
[21,22], we found evidence for an increase in colour discriminabillity for the cued item. Sec-
ondly, we found the angles between the cued and uncued planes to be centered around 90
degrees, suggesting that the Cued and Uncued item representations are orthogonalised. The
same observation was made in macaque LPFC [10].
In the post-cue delay interval, the representations of cued memory items were arranged
into parallel subspaces in both the monkey LPFC [10] and the RNN. This geometry abstracts
over the now-irrelevant stimulus location and aligns the colour representations into a common
template space. Consequently, the same downstream readout mechanism can be used to gen-
erate a response, regardless of the retrocue identity. Interestingly, the authors in [10] also
report the same neural geometry in a related task where the cue is provided prior to the stimu-
lus presentation, at the onset of the trial. Whilst we did not model this task variant, we predict
that the neural geometry developed by the RNNs under such conditions would similarly
match. This prediction is based on observations of parallel low-dimensional manifolds in
other tasks incorporating a response generalisation element, which have been made in both
biological and artificial networks [16–19]. Such findings collectively imply that the parallel
geometry might too be a general coding principle, its function being to facilitate the generalisa-
tion of knowledge across different behavioural contexts.
Nor does it seem like the parallel plane geometry in the post-cue delay is a trivial conse-
quence of the way we set up the task. In Experiment 2 we show that this geometry only
emerges when the cued information must be maintained in memory for several cycles prior to
the response. In contrast, when there is only a short post-cue delay, the RNNs continue to
maintain the cued information in the orthogonal format adopted in the pre-cue delay period.
Thus, our results suggest that the parallel geometry might additionally confer a robustness to
working memory maintenance, providing a normative explanation for its emergence in the
context of the retro-cueing task, as well as a testable prediction for future neurobiological
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 21 / 33

--- Page 22 ---
studies. We note that these speculations, based on our simulations, could be confirmed with
exact analysis of neural network dynamics (where these become available).
One notable difference between our results and those reported in [10] pertains to the nature
of the Cued item transformation that converts the orthogonal pre-cue geometry into parallel
post-cue planes. In macaque LPFC [10], the pre- and post-cue neural subspaces were indepen-
dent of one another (i.e., the post-cue subspace lied in the null space of the pre-cue subspace,
and vice-versa). The authors proposed that the associated transformation might therefore have
a role in output gating, whereby only the information expressed in the post-cue neural sub-
space is directly accessible to the downstream readout circuit (i.e., lies in its the target space).
In contrast, following the retrocue input, only one of the cued memory representations was
rotated in the RNNs to form the parallel plane geometry. Thus, the pre-cue and post-cue sub-
spaces were not independent. This difference might stem from the fact that the network output
was constrained only at the last timepoint of the trial. Consequently, not transforming the
other memory item would not have had a detrimental impact on network performance (such
as causing it to respond prematurely).
Whilst the Cued and Cued/Uncued geometries are interpretable with respect to the task
demands as outlined above, this is not the case for the Uncued geometry. We found the Uncued
geometry to be variable between the different network replicants. Surprisingly however, this
geometry was also highly predictive of network behaviour–in both Experiments 1 and 4, it
proved to be a reliable predictor of the training latency. This relationship was negative, indicat-
ing that to reach the same level of performance, models that relied on a more parallel Uncued
geometry needed to complete more training iterations than those that orthogonalised the
uncued item subspaces. We interpret this result to be a consequence of using random network
initialisation, which would predispose some networks to a more parallel Uncued geometry
even before training commenced. If the uncued planes happened to be aligned with the read-
out subspace in a network, it would be more prone to responding based on the uncued item
and thus need more training iterations to overcome this response bias. It is unclear whether
this geometry bore any relationship to behaviour of the monkeys reported in [10]. Interest-
ingly however, the authors reported a negative correlation between the degree of the Cued
plane alignment and the magnitude of behavioural error. In agreement with their report, we
found it to be positively predictive of the training latency in Experiment 3, signifying a perfor-
mance advantage in networks characterised by a more parallel geometry. However, this effect
was not detectable in Experiment 1. We are thus not entirely convinced by this explanation.
The similar representational geometry with the macaque suggests that the LPFC might use
a similar computational principle to solve the retro-cueing task. Thus, in later experiments we
capitalised on the inherent accessibility of the RNN model and extended our analyses to two
aspects not explored in [10]–the (i) emergence and (ii) mechanistic basis of the reported repre-
sentational geometry. As artificial neural network models are not endowed with representa-
tional schemes by hand and instead develop them through training, they offer a normative
account of how representational properties can be acquired through learning in biological
brains. To this end, we provide a description of the stereotypical representational geometries
the RNNs develop at different stages of training. The existence of such learning transitions can
be verified in vivo in future studies, to ascertain whether biological learning follows similar
principles to the learning algorithms used for training RNNs.
Our final contribution lies in the exploration of a related paradigm often used in beha-
vioural experiments, whereby the relationship between the retrocue and the trial-relevant item
is probabilistic. In Experiment 4, we recreated the key behavioural results characteristic of
human participants performing the task. We found that, under conditions where the cue was
on average valid (75% validity paradigm), recall performance was improved on trials where
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 22 / 33

--- Page 23 ---
the retrocue correctly pointed to the to-be-probed item and degraded otherwise, relative to the
corresponding performance levels in a fully probabilistic set-up (50% validity paradigm).
These effects have also been reported in human participants performing equivalent tasks (for a
review see [29]). In a further parallel to the human literature, we found the locus of the retro-
cue benefit to lie within an increased probability of recalling the target item [30–37] and
reduced probability of making swap or random errors [34]. However, we did not find a reliable
increase in the target item recall precision on valid trials, which has been described in some
human studies [31,34–37]. This discrepancy most likely reflects the training procedures fol-
lowed, which lead to matching overall performance levels on valid trials in both the 75% and
50% validity regimes.
To our surprise, only networks trained with 100% valid retrocues were characterised by a par-
allel Cued geometry in the post-cue delay interval. In contrast, networks trained under 75% and
50 validity conditions continued to maintain the cued item information in orthogonal subspaces
until the post-probe delay, when the planes were rotated into a shared subspace. This finding was
particularly surprising in the case of the 75% validity condition, given that the presence of the
behavioural effect described above strongly suggested that the networks relied on the retrocue
input to solve the task. However, upon further investigation, we discovered differences in the
amount of colour information (quantified by the CDI) between cued and uncued items for net-
works trained under this condition. More specifically, in the post-cue delay, the CDI for the
uncued item was significantly lower than for the cued item. This effect carried over into the post-
probe delay, where the CDI was significantly higher for probed than unprobed items, with the
magnitude of this difference significantly attenuated on invalidly cued trials. Most interestingly,
the size of this validity effect on CDI predicted network performance in the 75% condition (in
particular, the precision on the output estimated from the mixture model), providing an explana-
tion for why the network showed the same retro-cueing benefit as humans.
Overall, our findings are consistent with theories proposing that retrocues benefit perfor-
mance partly by triggering a representational transformation into an action-optimised format
[9]. We also find evidence for the attentional strengthening hypothesis of the retro-cueing
effect [29]–in Experiment 1, we observed a selective increase in colour information for the
cued item in the post-cue delay, in accordance with other observations from primate record-
ings [10] and human neuroimaging [21,22]. In experiment 4, a similar effect was observed
both when the retrocue input was deterministic (100% validity condition) as well as when it
correctly pointed to the probed item on the majority of the trials (75% validity condition). On
the other hand, our findings are inconsistent with accounts proposing the removal of uncued
items post-cue [29]–in Experiment 1, we found that the post-cue delay was still characterised
by significant information about the uncued item. The same result was reported in monkey
LPFC [10]. On a broader scale, this work speaks to the utility of the representational geometry
approach for revealing computational mechanism in both artificial and biological networks.
As seen with regards to the Cued geometry, characterising the geometric structure of the stim-
ulus representations and its transformations across different stages of processing permits infer-
ences about the nature of the computations learnt by the network. Over and above that, this
framework affords direct cross-modal comparisons within a context of a given paradigm, as
well as can shed light on computational similarities across different task domains.
Methods
Model architecture
Each recurrent neural network (RNN) consisted of an input, recurrent and output layer. The
input layer consisted of 36 units in total. There were 2 binary units corresponding to the
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 23 / 33

--- Page 29 ---
comparable with the first set of trained networks (7 cycles), as well as two novel delay lengths,
chosen from within and outside the training range (4 and 10 cycles, respectively).
Cross-temporal decoding. For each trial timepoint, we trained a set of 12 LDA classifiers
to perform pairwise discriminations between colour categories using the population hidden
activity vectors. Data was labelled according to the cued stimulus (labels corresponded to 4 col-
our categories). Each set of classifiers was subsequently tested on an unseen subset of the data
which included all trial timepoints. To assess the stability of memory maintenance dynamics
for a given condition (fixed or variable delay), we computed the average off-diagonal delay
cross-temporal decoding accuracy scores for all models and tested them against the chance
decoding level (50%) with a one-sample t-test. To compare the stability of the delay code
between models trained with fixed and variable delay lengths, we calculated the ratio between
the off- and on-diagonal cross-temporal decoding accuracy scores from the two delays and
compared this metric between the groups with an independent samples t-test.
Experiment 4
We modified the previously used trial structure by setting the length of the pre- and post-cue
delay periods to 5 cycles, as well as including a location probe (1 cycle), and a third, final mem-
ory delay of 5 cycles (post-probe delay). We designed 3 experimental conditions, defined by
the proportion of trials on which the retro-cue and probe inputs matched: 100%, 75% and
50%. As in Experiment 3, the models (N = 30 per condition) were not subject to any noise, and
we stopped training once the loss (summed over all the validly cued trials in the last epoch)
crossed the threshold of 0.0005. The training dataset included 512 unique trials and for each
epoch, we drew a random subset on which the retro-cue and probe inputs were set to mis-
match. To increase the statistical power of the multiple linear regression analysis, we increased
the sample size to N = 100 networks for each group. The Cued, Uncued and Cued/Uncued AI
values were calculated by following the same steps as outlined above for Experiment 1 except
using the hidden activity data from the last timepoint of the post-probe delay. The dependent
variable (total number of training epochs) was box-cox transformed (separately for each valid-
ity condition) prior to being used in the multiple regression model.
Behavioural analysis. We sampled network choices as previously described and then fit a
3-component mixture model to the trial-wise choice data, separately for every model, using
the Analogue Report Toolbox (https://www.paulba ys.com/toolbox/) in MATLAB version
2020b (Mathworks). The model is fit using maximum likelihood estimation and is described
by:
pða
rep orte d
Þ ¼ ð1   pU   pNTÞ�
K
ða
re port ed
  a
cue d
Þ þ pU
1
2p
þ pNT�
K
ða
rep orte d
  a
unc ued
Þ ð7:1Þ
where pU stands for the probability of making random guesses, pNT describes the probability
of misremembering the target location and ϕ
K
is a von Mises distribution function with zero
mean and concentration parameter K. Probability of making the target response (pT) is the
difference between 1 and the sum of pU and pNT. Thus, choices are modelled as arising from
a mixture of target and non-target-guided components, as well as random guesses. The fit
parameters (pT, pU, pNT and K) were compared between trials on which the retro-cue and
probe inputs matched (valid) and mismatched (invalid trials), as well as across the experimen-
tal conditions (100%, 75% and 50% retro-cue validity). To this effect, for each parameter, we
used a 2x3 mixed model ANOVA, with a repeated measures factor of trial type, and a
between-subject factor of experimental condition. In cases where the data did not satisfy the
assumptions of the mixed model ANOVA, we used a combination of non-parametric tests
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 29 / 33

--- Page 30 ---
instead. In such cases, to test the main effect of the repeated measures factor of trial type, we
concatenated the data from the two validity conditions and assessed the difference between
valid and invalid trials with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test. To test the main effect of the
between-subject factor of validity condition, we averaged the data between the valid and
invalid trials and compared it between the two validity conditions with a Mann-Whitney U-
test. Lastly, to test for an interaction between the trial type and validity condition factors, we
calculated the difference between the valid and invalid trials and compared it across the valid-
ity conditions with a Mann-Whitney U-test.
Software. All statistical analyses described were implemented in python using the scipy.
stats package (version 1.7.1), with the exception of the ANOVA, multiple linear regression and
Bayesian statistics analyses, which were performed in JASP (version 0.12.2). All networks were
trained using the pytorch library (version 1.10.2).
Supporting information
S1 Note. Complementary analyses for networks from Experiment 1.
(DOCX)
S2 Note. Training speed comparison for networks trained under various post-cue mainte-
nance pressure conditions.
(DOCX)
S3 Note. Rotated / unrotated Cued plane AI analysis for Experiment 3.
(DOCX)
S4 Note. Results of the ANOVA analyses of mixture model parameters fit to choice data
from Experiment 4.
(DOCX)
S1 Fig. Training dynamics and neural geometry of networks from Experiment 1. A. Train-
ing dynamics of the networks from Experiment 1. Training loss values across all epochs, col-
ours correspond to individual networks. B. Upper: Raw (black) and smoothed (green) training
loss plotted across epochs. Lower: The derivative of the smoothed loss with respect to time.
Red dot in both panels corresponds to the local minimum chosen as the ‘mid-training plateau’
timepoint (refer to the Methods section in the main text for details). Data from an example
model. C. Results of a decoding analysis complementary to the CDI analysis reported in
Fig 3H. Decoding accuracy (expressed as units of standard normal distribution, snd) for the
pre-cue subspaces (averaged across both locations, black circles) and cued and uncued sub-
spaces in the post-cue delay (blue triangles and green crosses, respectively). Bar height corre-
sponds to the mean across all models. Significance and Bayes factor values correspond to the
results of contrasts reported in the section below. D. Between-plane angles θ (rectified, panels
on the left) and phase-alignment angles ψ (panels on the right) for the unrotated (triangles)
and rotated (squares) planes. Individual models and population mean shown as transparent
and opaque markers, respectively.
(DOCX)
S2 Fig. Training speed comparison for networks trained under various post-cue mainte-
nance pressure conditions. A. Time to convergence (number of training epochs, y-axis) for
models trained with different post-cue delay lengths (x-axis). Dots correspond to the means
across models, error bars to SEM.
(DOCX)
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 30 / 33

--- Page 31 ---
S3 Fig. Networks trained with variable delay interval lengths show improved temporal gen-
eralisation on the task but similar representational geometry as those trained with fixed
delay lengths. A. Angular error density plots for the 3 different test conditions: datasets with
the delay interval length used during training (trained), a previously not experienced delay
length that fell within the training range (in-range), and a novel delay outside of the training
range (out-of-range). First and second rows correspond to the data from the networks trained
with a fixed delay and variable delay intervals, respectively. Datapoints correspond to M±SEM
across all models, shown with the best von Mises fit (solid line). B.-C. Angles θ and ψ between
the two Uncued and Cued/Uncued planes (averaged across the two retrocue locations) in the
post-cue delay interval, respectively. Individual models shown in transparent, grand averages
in opaque colours. D. AI for the unrotated (light grey) and rotated (dark grey) subspaces. Sig-
nificance values correspond to the results of a paired t-test. E. Analogous plane angles θ and
phase alignment angles ψ for the unrotated (triangles) and rotated (squares) planes. Values for
individual models and grand averages shown as transparent and opaque markers, respectively.
Note theta angles have been rectified.
(DOCX)
S4 Fig. Results of the regression analyses predicting the number of training epochs (after a
box-cox transformation) from AI Cued, AI Cued/Uncued and AI Uncued (columns, left to
right) in Experiment 4. Results of the regression analyses predicting the number of training
epochs (after a box-cox transformation) from AI Cued, AI Cued/Uncued and AI Uncued (col-
umns, left to right) in Experiment 4. Rows correspond to the three retrocue validity conditions
examined (100, 75 and 50%, top to bottom). Data shown in grey dots, regression lines of best
fit in red, 95% confidence interval for the slope in navy dashed lines.
(DOCX)
Acknowledgmen ts
We wish to thank Michał Wo ´ jcik, Dante Wasmuht, Jake Stroud, Andrew Saxe and Paul
Muhle-Karbe for useful discussions and comments on the manuscript.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Emilia P. Piwek, Mark G. Stokes.
Formal analysis: Emilia P. Piwek.
Funding acquisition: Mark G. Stokes, Christopher Summerfield.
Investigation: Emilia P. Piwek.
Software: Emilia P. Piwek.
Supervision: Mark G. Stokes, Christopher Summerfield.
Visualization: Emilia P. Piwek.
Writing – original draft: Emilia P. Piwek, Christopher Summerfield.
Writing – review & editing: Emilia P. Piwek, Mark G. Stokes, Christopher Summerfield.
References
1. Fuster JM. The Prefrontal Cortex—A n Update. Neuron. 2001; 30: 319–333. https:// doi.org/10.10 16/
S0896-627 3(01)0028 5-9 PMID: 11394996
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 31 / 33

--- Page 32 ---
2. Goldman-R akic PS. Cellular basis of working memo ry. Neuron. 1995; 14: 477–485. https:// doi.org/10.
1016/0896-6 273(95)90 304-6 PMID: 7695894
3. Durstewi tz D, Seamans JK, Sejnowski TJ. Neurocomp utational models of working memory. Nat Neu-
rosci. 2000; 3: 1184–1191. https://doi.or g/10.1038/ 81460 PMID: 11127836
4. Wang X-J. 50 years of mnem onic persistent activity: quo vadis? Trends in Neurosciences . 2021; 44:
888–902. https:// doi.org/10.10 16/j.tins.20 21.09.00 1 PMID: 34654556
5. Masse NY, Yang GR, Song HF, Wang XJ, Freedma n DJ. Circuit mechanism s for the maintena nce and
manipul ation of information in working memory. Nat Neurosc i. 2019; 22: 1159–116 7. https://doi.or g/10.
1038/s41 593-019-0 414-3 PMID: 31182866
6. Orhan AE, Ma WJ. Efficient probabilistic inferenc e in generic neural networks trained with non-proba bi-
listic feedback. Nat Commun. 2017; 8: 138. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/s41467 -017-0018 1-8 PMID:
28743932
7. Griffin IC, Nobre AC. Orienting Attention to Locations in Internal Representa tions. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscienc e. 2003; 15: 1176–1 194. https://doi.or g/10.116 2/0898929033 2259813 9 PMID: 14709235
8. Schmidt BK, Vogel EK, Woodman GF, Luck SJ. Voluntary and automatic attentional control of visual
working memory. Percept ion & Psych ophysics. 2002; 64: 754–763. https://doi.or g/10.375 8/
BF03194742 PMID: 12201334
9. Myers NE, Stokes MG, Nobre AC. Prioritizing Informatio n during Working Memory : Beyond Sustaine d
Internal Attentio n. Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 2017; 21: 449–461. https:/ /doi.org/10.10 16/j.tics.2 017.
03.010 PMID: 28454719
10. Panichello MF, Buschman TJ. Shared mechanism s underlie the control of working memory and atten-
tion. Nature. 2021; 592: 601–605. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/s41586 -021-0339 0-w PMID: 3379046 7
11. Hajonide s JE, Nobre AC, van Ede F, Stokes MG. Decoding visual colour from scalp electroenc ephalog-
raphy measurem ents. NeuroIma ge. 2021; 237: 118030 . https://doi.or g/10.1016/ j.neuroimage.2 021.
118030 PMID: 338362 72
12. Flesch T, Juechem s K, Dumbals ka T, Saxe A, Summerfi eld C. Rich and lazy learning of task represen-
tations in brains and neural networks. bioRxiv . 2021.
13. Libby A, Buschm an TJ. Rotational dynamic s reduce interfe rence between sensory and memory repre-
sentations. Nat Neurosci. 2021; 24: 715–726. https://do i.org/10.1038 /s41593- 021-00821- 9 PMID:
33821001
14. Nieh EH, Schottdor f M, Freeman NW, Low RJ, Lewallen S, Koay SA, et al. Geome try of abstract
learned knowledge in the hippoca mpus. Nature. 2021; 1–5. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/s41586 -021-0365 2-
7 PMID: 341355 12
15. Xie Y, Hu P, Li J, Chen J, Song W, Wang X-J, et al. Geomet ry of sequence working memory in macaque
prefrontal cortex. Science. 2022; 375: 632–63 9. https://doi.or g/10.1126 /science.abm 0204 PMID:
35143322
16. Bernardi S, Benna MK, Rigotti M, Munuera J, Fusi S, Salzman CD. The Geometry of Abstraction in the
Hippocam pus and Prefrontal Cortex. Cell. 2020; S009286742 031228 9. https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.cell.
2020.09. 031 PMID: 33058757
17. Sheahan H, Luyckx F, Nelli S, Teupe C, Summerfi eld C. Neural state space alignment for magnitude
generalizatio n in humans and recurrent networks. Neuron. 2021; 109: 1214–1 226.e8. https://doi.or g/
10.1016/ j.neuron.202 1.02.004 PMID: 33626322
18. Luyckx F, Nili H, Spitzer B, Summerfi eld C. Neural structure mapping in human probabilist ic reward
learning. Elife. 2019;8. https://doi.or g/10.7554/ eLife.42816 PMID: 308437 89
19. Remington ED, Narain D, Hossein i EA, Jazaye ri M. Flexible Sensor imotor Comput ations through Rapid
Reconfigur ation of Cortical Dynami cs. Neuron. 2018; 98: 1005–1019. https://do i.org/10.1016 /j.neuron.
2018.05. 020 PMID: 29879384
20. Elsayed GF, Lara AH, Kaufman MT, Churchlan d MM, Cunningh am JP. Reorganiz ation between prepa-
ratory and movem ent population response s in motor cortex. Nature Commun ications. 2016; 7: 13239.
https://doi.or g/10.103 8/ncomms 13239 PMID: 2780734 5
21. Ester EF, Nouri A, Rodrigu ez L. Retrospec tive Cues Mitigate Informatio n Loss in Human Cortex during
Working Memory Storage. J Neurosc i. 2018; 38: 8538–8548. https://doi.or g/10.1523/ JNEUROSCI.
1566-18.201 8 PMID: 30126971
22. Sprague TC, Ester EF, Serenc es JT. Restoring Latent Visual Working Memory Representa tions in
Human Cortex. Neuron. 2016; 91: 694–70 7. https://doi.or g/10.101 6/j.neuron.20 16.07.00 6 PMID:
27497224
23. Russin J, Zolfaghar M, Park SA, Boorman E, O’Reilly RC. A Neural Networ k Model of Continual Learn-
ing with Cognitive Control. arXiv:220204 773 [cs, q-bio]. 2022 [cited 7 Mar 2022]. Available: http://arxiv .
org/abs/2 202.04773 https://doi. org/10.1016/j .neurops ychologia. 2014.04.016 PMID: 37223441
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 32 / 33

--- Page 33 ---
24. Orhan AE, Ma WJ. A diverse range of factors affect the nature of neural representatio ns underlying
short-term memory. Nat Neurosci. 2019; 22: 275–283. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/s41593 -018-0314 -y
PMID: 306647 67
25. Inagaki HK, Fontolan L, Romani S, Svobod a K. Discrete attractor dynamic s underlies persistent activity
in the frontal cortex. Nature. 2019; 566: 212–21 7. https://doi.or g/10.103 8/s41586-019- 0919-7 PMID:
30728503
26. Bays PM, Catalao RFG, Husain M. The precision of visual working memory is set by allocatio n of a
shared resource . J Vis. 2009; 9: 7.1–11. https://doi.or g/10.1167/ 9.10.7 PMID: 1981078 8
27. Flesch T, Juechem s K, Dumbals ka T, Saxe A, Summerfi eld C. Orthogona l represent ations for robust
context-dep endent task perform ance in brains and neural networks . Neuron. 2022; 110: 1258–1270.
e11. https://do i.org/10.1016 /j.neuron.2 022.01.005 PMID: 350854 92
28. Flesch T, Balaguer J, Dekker R, Nili H, Summerfi eld C. Comparing continual task learning in minds and
machines. Procee dings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2018; 115: E10313– E10322. https://doi.
org/10.1073/ pnas.180075 5115 PMID: 30322916
29. Souza AS, Oberauer K. In search of the focus of attention in working memory: 13 years of the retro-cue
effect. Atten Percep t Psychophys . 2016; 78: 1839–186 0. https://doi.or g/10.3758/ s13414-016- 1108-5
PMID: 270986 47
30. Murray AM, Nobre AC, Clark IA, Cravo AM, Stokes MG. Attention restores discrete items to visual
short-term memory. Psychol Sci. 2013; 24: 550–556. https://d oi.org/10.117 7/095679 7612457782
PMID: 234367 86
31. Williams M, Hong SW, Kang M-S, Carlisle NB, Woodman GF. The benefit of forgetti ng. Psychonom ic
Bulletin & Review. 2013; 20: 348–355. https:// doi.org/10.37 58/s1342 3-012-035 4-3 PMID: 23208769
32. Souza AS, Rerko L, Lin H-Y, Oberauer K. Focus ed attention improves working memory: implication s for
flexible-reso urce and discrete-ca pacity models. Atten Percept Psycho phys. 2014; 76: 2080–2102.
https://doi.or g/10.375 8/s13414 -014-0687-2 PMID: 24874258
33. Souza AS, Rerko L, Oberauer K. Getting more from visual working memory : Retro-cue s enhance
retrieval and protect from visual interference. Journal of Experime ntal Psychology: Human Percep tion
and Performanc e. 2016; 42: 890–91 0. https://doi.or g/10.103 7/xhp00001 92 PMID: 26752731
34. Gunseli E, van Moorselaar D, Meeter M, Olivers CNL. The reliability of retro-cues determines the fate of
noncued visual working memory represent ations. Psychon Bull Rev. 2015; 22: 1334–1341. https:// doi.
org/10.3758/ s13423-014- 0796-x PMID: 25563713
35. Makovski T, Pertzov Y. Attention and memory protection: Interactio ns between retrospectiv e attention
cueing and interference. The Quarterly Journal of Experimen tal Psychology. 2015; 68: 1735–1743.
https://doi.or g/10.108 0/17470218.2 015.1049623 PMID: 259807 84
36. van Moorsela ar D, Gunseli E, Theeuwes J, Olivers CNL. The time course of protectin g a visual memory
representat ion from perceptu al interfe rence. Frontiers in Huma n Neuroscience. 2015;8. https://doi.or g/
10.3389/ fnhum.201 4.01053 PMID: 256285 55
37. Wallis G, Stokes M, Cousijn H, Woolrich M, Nobre AC. Frontoparie tal and Cingulo- opercular Networks
Play Dissociab le Roles in Control of Working Memory. J Cogn Neurosc i. 2015; 27: 2019–2 034. https://
doi.org/10.11 62/jocn_a_0083 8 PMID: 26042457
38. Saxe AM, McClell and JL, Ganguli S. Exact solutions to the nonlin ear dynamics of learning in deep linear
neural networks. arXiv; 2014 Feb. Report No.: arXiv:1312.61 20. https://doi.or g/10.48550/ arXiv.1312.
6120
PLOS COMP UTATIONAL  BIOLOGY
Control of working memo ry in a recurrent neural network
PLOS Computationa l Biology | https:/ /doi.org/10.13 71/journal.p cbi.1011555 October 18, 2023 33 / 33